कदाचन व्रजशिशुभि: समं भवान्
वनाशने विहितमति: प्रगेतराम् ।
समावृतो बहुतरवत्समण्डलै:
सतेमनैर्निरगमदीश जेमनै: ॥१॥
कदाचन	once
व्रजशिशुभि: समं	along with the children of Gokul
भवान् वन-अशने	Thou, eating in the woods (picnic)
विहित-मति:	making up the mind
प्रगेतराम् समावृत:	early in the morning surrounded by
बहुतर-वत्स-मण्डलै:	many herds of calves
सतेमनै:-निरगमत्-	with eatables set out
ईश जेमनै:	O Lord! (also taking along) cooked rice
Once Thou decided to have a picnic in the woods. Along with the children of Gokul and surrounded by a large herd of calves, Thou set out early in the morning. O Lord Thou also took along eatables, cooked rice and other delicacies.
विनिर्यतस्तव चरणाम्बुजद्वया-
दुदञ्चितं त्रिभुवनपावनं रज: ।
महर्षय: पुलकधरै: कलेबरै-
रुदूहिरे धृतभवदीक्षणोत्सवा: ॥२॥
विनिर्यत: तव	Thy having set out
चरण-अम्बुज-द्वयात्-	from Thy two lotus like feet
उदञ्चितं	risen up
त्रिभुवन-पावनं रज:	(that which) sanctifies the three worlds, dust
महर्षय: पुलकधरै:	the great sages with horripilation
कलेबरै:-उदूहिरे	on their bodies received
धृत-भवत्-ईक्षण-	holding Thy sight
उत्सवा:	as celebration
When Thou set out for the woods, from Thy lotus like two feet the dust arose which sanctifies the three worlds. The great sages received that dust on their bodies with great joy and horripilation as they feasted their eyes on Thy sight.
प्रचारयत्यविरलशाद्वले तले
पशून् विभो भवति समं कुमारकै: ।
अघासुरो न्यरुणदघाय वर्तनी
भयानक: सपदि शयानकाकृति: ॥३॥
प्रचारयति-	grazing
अविरल-शाद्वले तले	on the thick grass land
पशून् विभो	the cattle, O Lord!
भवति समं कुमारकै:	Thee with the lads
अघासुर: न्यरुणत्-	Aghaasura blocked
अघाय वर्तनी	for an evil deed the path
भयानक: सपदि	most terrifying, suddenly
शयानक-आकृति:	in a python form
Thou and the lads were grazing the cattle on the thick grass lands. Suddenly the most terrifying demon Aghaasura, in the form of a formidable python, with an evil intention blocked the way.
महाचलप्रतिमतनोर्गुहानिभ-
प्रसारितप्रथितमुखस्य कानने ।
मुखोदरं विहरणकौतुकाद्गता:
कुमारका: किमपि विदूरगे त्वयि ॥४॥
महाचल-प्रतिम-तनो:-	with a mountain like body
गुहा-निभ-प्रसारित-	cave like spread out
प्रथित-मुखस्य	extended mouth
कानने	in the forest
मुख-उदरं	in the mouth cavity
विहरण-कौतुकात्-	to explore in eagerness
गता: कुमारका:	entered the lads
किम्-अपि	(when) somewhat
विदूरगे त्वयि	ahead had gone, Thee
Thou had gone a little ahead. The lads mistook the huge body of the Asura for a mountain and its large spread out mouth for a cave. In their eagerness to explore the woods, they entered the python's open mouth.
प्रमादत: प्रविशति पन्नगोदरं
क्वथत्तनौ पशुपकुले सवात्सके ।
विदन्निदं त्वमपि विवेशिथ प्रभो
सुहृज्जनं विशरणमाशु रक्षितुम् ॥५॥
प्रमादत: प्रविशति	by mistake, had entered
पन्नग-उदरं	the snake's belly
क्वथत्-तनौ	(they) felt heat on their bodies
पशुपकुले सवात्सके	the Gopa boys along with the calves
विदन्-इदम् त्वम्-अपि	knowing this, Thou also
विवेशिथ प्रभो	entered O Lord!
सुहृत्-जनं	the friend folk
विशरणम्-	who were helpless
आशु रक्षितुम्	immediately to save
The Gopa boys along with the calves had entered the belly of the snake by mistake and started to feel the heat therein. O Lord! Apprehending the situation, Thou also entered immediately to save the helpless friends.
गलोदरे विपुलितवर्ष्मणा त्वया
महोरगे लुठति निरुद्धमारुते ।
द्रुतं भवान् विदलितकण्ठमण्डलो
विमोचयन् पशुपपशून् विनिर्ययौ ॥६॥
गल-उदरे	in the throat's cavity
विपुलित-वर्ष्मणा	with (Thy) increased body
त्वया	by Thee
महोरगे लुठति	(when) the python was wreathing
निरुद्ध-मारुते	because of the obstruction of the breath
द्रुतं भवान्	quickly Thou
विदलित-कण्ठ-मण्डल:	tearing asunder the neck portion
विमोचयन् पशुप-पशून्	released the Gopa boys and the calves
विनिर्ययौ	and came out
In the cavity of the throat of the python, Thou increased Thy size of Thy body, thus obstructing its breath. It began to wreath in agony, then Thou tore open its neck portion and releasing the Gopa boys and the calves, Thou also came out.
क्षणं दिवि त्वदुपगमार्थमास्थितं
महासुरप्रभवमहो महो महत् ।
विनिर्गते त्वयि तु निलीनमञ्जसा
नभ:स्थले ननृतुरथो जगु: सुरा: ॥७॥
क्षणं दिवि	for an instant, in the sky
त्वत्-उपगम-अर्थम्-आस्थितं	Thy emergence awaiting
महा-असुर-प्रभवम्-	from the great Asura emerging
अहो मह: महत्	Oh! A brilliance great
विनिर्गते त्वयि तु	came out as Thou
निलीनम्-अञ्जसा	merged immediately (into Thee only)
नभ:-स्थले	in the skies
ननृतु:-अथ:	danced and then
जगु: सुरा:	sang the gods
A great brilliance emerged from the Asura and rose, in the sky and awaited Thy emerging from the body of the python. Oh! What a wonder, as soon as Thou came out the brilliance merged into Thee, while the gods danced and sang.
सविस्मयै: कमलभवादिभि: सुरै-
रनुद्रुतस्तदनु गत: कुमारकै: ।
दिने पुनस्तरुणदशामुपेयुषि
स्वकैर्भवानतनुत भोजनोत्सवम् ॥८॥
सविस्मयै:	wonderstruck
कमलभव-आदिभि:	Brahamaa and other
सुरै:-अनुद्रुत:	gods (watching and) following (Thee)
तदनु गत:	after that (Thou) went
कुमारकै: दिने पुन:-	with the Gopa boys (when) the day again
तरुण-दशाम्-उपेयुषि	youthful state attained (it became noon)
स्वकै: भवान्-	with (Thy) own people Thou
अतनुत भोजन-उत्सवम्	carried out the food celebration (picnic lunch)
Brahmaa and other gods were wonderstruck and watched Thee and followed Thee in the skies. After that Thou went with the Gopa boys when the day had reached noontime and with Thy own people Thou celebrated the food festival, the picnic lunch.
विषाणिकामपि मुरलीं नितम्बके
निवेशयन् कबलधर: कराम्बुजे ।
प्रहासयन् कलवचनै: कुमारकान्
बुभोजिथ त्रिदशगणैर्मुदा नुत: ॥९॥
विषाणिकाम्-अपि	the horn and also
मुरलीं नितम्बके	the flute, in the waist band
निवेशयन्	tucking
कबलधर: कराम्बुजे	a ball of rice holding in the lotus like hand
प्रहासयन्	making (them) laugh
कलवचनै:	by humorous talks
कुमारकान् बुभोजिथ	the boys, (Thou) ate
त्रिदशगणै:	by the gods
मुदा नुत:	joyfully praised
The horn and the flute were tucked in Thy waist band. Thou were holding a ball of rice in Thy lotus like hand and provoked peals of laughter among the boys by Thy humorous talks. As Thou took Thy meal the gods joyfully sang Thy praises.
सुखाशनं त्विह तव गोपमण्डले
मखाशनात् प्रियमिव देवमण्डले ।
इति स्तुतस्त्रिदशवरैर्जगत्पते
मरुत्पुरीनिलय गदात् प्रपाहि माम् ॥१०॥
सुख-अशनम् तु -इह	the happy meal indeed here
तव गोप-मण्डले	to Thee amidst the Gopas
मख-अशनात्	than the offerings of the sacrifices
प्रियम्-इव	is more pleasing
देव-मण्डले	amidst the gods
इति स्तुत:-त्रिदशवरै:-	thus praised by the great gods
जगत्पते	O Lord of the universe!
मरुत्पुरीनिलय	residing in Guruvaayur
गदात् प्रपाहि माम्	from ailments save me
O Lord of the Universe! The great gods praised Thee saying that the meal taken happily with the Gopa boys gave Thee more pleasure than the sacrificial offerings which Thou had received with the gods. O Thou Residing in Guruvaayur! Save me from my ailments.